[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>GEORGE NOORY: Welcome
to "Beyond Belief."
Gay Hendricks is with us-- has
served for more than 40 years
as one of the major contributors
to the fields of relationship
transformation and
body-mind therapies.
He has worked with more than
20,000 people in his career
as a clinical psychologist,
expanding people
into deeper levels of
abundance, luck, and success.
And you've done that
with a lot of success.
Gay, welcome to the program.
>>GAY HENDRICKS:
Thank you very much.
I'm really happy to
be here with you.
>>NOORY: What is it like dealing
with a mind-body therapy?
>>HENDRICKS: Well, what it's
like is-- have you ever noticed
that when somebody
is talking to you,
the words are coming
out here, but it's
their body that's really
telling you what's going on?
>>NOORY: What the
story is, yeah.
>>HENDRICKS: Like,
for example, I
was working with a man who
came in, and he had back pain.
But he wasn't getting any better
with chiropractors and massage
and that kind of thing.
And I noticed, as he
was talking about it,
that he kept
touching his heart--
>>NOORY: Huh.
>>HENDRICKS: --unconsciously.
>>NOORY: Just like this?
>>HENDRICKS: Yeah.
He would be talking to
me about his back pain,
but he kept doing this.
And so I said, Andy, I noticed
that you touch your heart
frequently when you're
talking about your back pain.
That was the key to it because
it was really a heart issue.
He was in grief about
something that had happened,
and he didn't know how
to deal with the grief.
And so he kind of
stuffed it into his back
because he did know how
to deal with back pain.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
>>HENDRICKS: And so that's
why body-mind therapies
are so important-- because the
body is talking all the time.
And I noticed early on,
even before I really
went and got my PhD and
this and everything like
that, I started noticing
that members in my family
would even do that.
So I caught my
attention when I was
a little kid that my mother,
who was the mayor of my town
that I lived in
Leesburg, Florida--
I would hear her on
the phone being mayor.
And she would be talking,
da-da-da-da, da-da-da-da.
But I would be noticing
that she would be with--
doing these other things
like lighting a cigarette
and writing furiously.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>HENDRICKS: And
it was like there
was two parts of her, the mayor
part and then the real part.
>>NOORY: The mayor part
and then the other part.
>>HENDRICKS: Yeah.
And so I think that's what
really began to key me
in on body language,
and that became
a real fascination of mine.
>>NOORY: Is everybody part of
this kind of body language mind
therapy?
Does everybody do
something like that?
>>HENDRICKS: I think so.
Pretty much.
And you can even notice
with other species.
I have two cats, and I notice
their body language a lot.
When they want to eat
something, they'll
come over to me and they'll go--
[LICKS LIPS]
>>NOORY: When you watch,
like, a presidential speech,
do you look for
the body language?
>>HENDRICKS: It's all I can see.
It ruins it for me.
>>NOORY: I knew it.
What do you see with
just about anybody?
I mean, what kind of
differences do you
see with what they're saying
and what they're doing?
>>HENDRICKS: Well, politicians
get really good at covering up
their body language.
>>NOORY: Really?
So they're doing it on purpose?
>>HENDRICKS: They're doing it on
purpose because they get a lot
of coaching early
on where they say--
like, for example,
did you see the--
going back now, 20
years, maybe you
remember the moment where
a president of ours said,
I didn't have sex
with that woman?
>>NOORY: Uh-huh.
I do.
>>HENDRICKS: Did you notice
what he did with his hand right
after he said that?
>>NOORY: I don't remember that.
>>HENDRICKS: Well, I bet
you heard a story when
you were a kid that
if you told lies,
your nose would get bigger.
>>NOORY: The Pinocchio theory.
>>HENDRICKS: The
Pinocchio effect.
The moment he told
that lie, he reached up
and scratched his nose.
>>NOORY: No.
>>HENDRICKS: Yep.
Yep, watch it.
Go back and look at it.
>>NOORY: And now, what
does that tell you?
>>HENDRICKS: Well, what
it tells me is he's lying.
>>NOORY: Just because
he touched his nose?
>>HENDRICKS: When I saw that,
George, I said to my wife,
uh-oh, we're in trouble now,
because the president just
told a whopper on
national TV, and he's not
going to be able to
get out from under it.
>>NOORY: That's amazing.
>>HENDRICKS: But you know,
they all do that kind of thing.
They all have to
kind of stuff things.
And we really can't
stuff things too long.
It's going to come out
in some kind of form.
So we have to kind of
keep monitoring ourselves
all the time.
>>NOORY: I bet if you
understand it as an individual,
you can use these techniques--
the knowledge of
these techniques--
to enhance your own self, right?
>>HENDRICKS: Well, yeah.
That's my line of work.
>>NOORY: The art of
negotiation-- just
about everything.
>>HENDRICKS: Just
And beginning about 30 years
ago, I happened to be--
I was just finishing my
doctorate at Stanford
when Silicon Valley
was getting underway.
And I spent a lot of times
working with executives
from big companies
that are big now,
but that were little
startups back then.
And one thing I noticed,
that-- all of these people
were incredibly
brilliant in their minds,
but they didn't have a clue
about their emotional life.
And there are things
in everyday life
that we get sad about or
scared about or angry about.
And unless we know how to deal
with those in a direct way,
they're going to get stuffed
somewhere in our bodies
and create pain.
>>NOORY: What if
people are consciously
trying to withhold themselves?
Do you see that, too?
>>HENDRICKS: I do.
I believe that many people are
trying to conceal themselves.
I think that a lot of us have
a program inside that says,
I better not let
the outside world
know who I really
am because then I'll
get in trouble for it.
>>NOORY: You know, what's
interesting with COVID, Gay--
I've noticed that with
people wearing masks,
you see their eyes better.
It's an amazing situation
where in the past,
you would look at
their hand gestures
and their other things.
But now you concentrate
on their eyes.
And it's the weirdest feeling,
but it's kind of neat, too.
>>HENDRICKS: It really is.
And I was walking through
the airport yesterday.
It was my first
commercial air flight
that I'd been on that I had
to go into a regular airport.
>>NOORY: Since this mess.
>>HENDRICKS: Since the mess--
and I was just blown away
by the very thing that
you're talking about,
that it's a whole
different experience now,
having people-- the
bottom half of their face
missing, that you
get to read body
language, though by their eyes.
And they really are the
windows to the soul.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
"Mystery Teachings" host,
Dr. Theresa Bullard,
talks about how the people in
our lives are part of this.
>>THERESA BULLARD: There's both
an art and science to building
synergistic relationships.
And it's some of the
biggest challenges
we encounter in our lives.
That's because we humans
are social creatures.
And yet, we also have
all of our flaws,
attachments, and
egos to contend with.
We both love and
despise each other.
We uplift, and we tear down.
Sometimes we can really
grate on each other's nerves,
while other times, we help each
other feel safe and cared for.
And it's shocking to see
how quickly these feelings
and dynamics can
shift from one end
of the spectrum to the
other, sometimes overnight.
How can we gain greater mastery
in this aspect of our lives?
Well, for starters, there's
nothing like the relationships
in our lives to really
show us where we still
need to work on ourselves.
The people in our lives
are mirrors for us
to see ourselves.
Unfortunately, most people
don't want to see themselves.
So rather than own
their own stuff
they project it onto others.
If we could just
shift this one thing
and start seeing the
people in our lives
as reflections of
ourselves, it would
make a world of difference.
Stop pointing the
finger out there,
and start looking in here.
>>NOORY: What is it about the
eyes of the facial gestures,
Gay, that let you determine
exactly their emotional state?
>>HENDRICKS: I
just had a memory,
as we were watching the
video, of the first time
I met my wife 40 years ago.
We had this amazing
conversation that
actually involved her eyes.
And I had just gotten out
of a troubled relationship
I'd been in for about five
years, and I'd made a vow.
I'm never going to get
into another relationship
unless both of us
agree that we're
going to be absolutely honest
with each other and both of us
agree that we're not
going to get into blame.
We're going to actually
take responsibility
when things come up
and say, oh, yeah,
I can see how I created that.
>>NOORY: Yeah, I did that.
>>HENDRICKS: Yeah, I did that.
And the other thing I'd learned
was I'm a creative person.
I go in a room for two or
three hours a day, at least,
and write books.
And so if my partner isn't
a creative person too,
they might be jealous
of that, or they want
me to be doing something else.
And that had been a real issue
in other relationships of mine.
So I had this great
conversation when I met my wife.
I said, I'd love to take
you out for a cup of coffee.
But first, I've
got to let you know
that I'm only interested
in relationships where
both people tell the truth
and both people claim
responsibility for
things rather than blame
and both people are committed
to their creativity.
On those terms, would you
like to go out with me, Katie?
And here's what
happened with her eyes.
She went like this--
ding-ding-ding-ding-ding.
You know, it's like she
was a computer on overload.
>>NOORY: Intentionally?
Or that was just part of her--
>>HENDRICKS: No, that was her--
>>NOORY: That was her reaction.
>>HENDRICKS: That her
reaction, was-- oh, my god.
What have I gotten myself into?
Who is this crazy
guy that's just
told me this strange thing?
But anyway, finally she
said, how about lunch?
But I just wanted to illustrate
that the eyes are always
going to be--
they're going to go this
direction, this direction,
this direction,
or this direction.
And each one of
them has some kind
of a message from
our brain that's
getting down to our eyes.
See, it only takes
1/20th of a second or so
for our body language
to occur, but it takes
longer for language to develop.
So that's the reason
the body is speaking
before our minds are speaking.
>>NOORY: Isn't it amazing,
though, how that works?
I mean, the eyes are the eyes.
They're shaped the way they are.
They don't change.
Yet, the way you open your eyes
and you close your eyes or you
look--
people can tell
what your mood is.
>>HENDRICKS: I was
watching a documentary--
I mean, one of those
"48 Hours" type
shows with a
courtroom situation.
And they had a person
on the stand who
was telling a whopper of a lie.
And when she was
telling the lie,
her eyes were actually
going like this,
darting back and forth.
>>NOORY: Now, that's
obvious, right?
>>HENDRICKS: Yeah,
it's really obvious.
But everybody's doing some small
version of that kind of thing
all the time.
I think what really
works though is
for us to catch onto that in
ourselves and start noticing,
hm, I notice I just
crossed my arms.
What am I doing here?
Am I afraid of something?
Or am I defensive?
Or, hm-- kind of begin to wonder
about ourselves a little bit.
>>NOORY: What's it mean
when you're, like, standing,
talking to people, and you
put your hand in your pocket?
Is there a meaning?
Does every gesture
have a meaning?
>>HENDRICKS: I don't
think you can say
every gesture has a meaning.
It may have a meaning for
that individual, though.
You have to look at it in
an individual kind of thing
because one person might be
putting his hand in his pocket
to protect himself, and
another might be doing it just
to kind of, I don't know,
relax, or something like that.
>>NOORY: Relax, sure.
>>HENDRICKS: I
know my granddad--
I grew up around my granddad.
And I could always tell when
he was happy and relaxed
because he'd be standing around,
and he'd be jingling his change
in his pocket.
And it was just this
little mannerism,
but it was always happy granddad
when he was standing around
kind of jingling his change.
>>NOORY: You have a book
out called "The Big Leap,"
one of your first books.
You wrote this 10 years ago.
Tell me about that.
>>HENDRICKS: Well, "The Big
Leap" is about two things.
It's about what I call
the upper limit problem.
And I noticed with-- especially
with successful people--
that almost all successful
people have a tendency
to upper limit themselves.
When they start getting
more and more successful,
they find some way to
sabotage themselves for it.
>>NOORY: Self-destructive
>>HENDRICKS: Yeah,
self-destructive.
Like, a person would have--
like, a Silicon Valley
executive I worked with--
he'd have a great day
at work, and then he'd
go home and pick a
fight with his wife
and spend the whole evening--
>>NOORY: Taking it out on her.
>>HENDRICKS: Yeah, stuff
that he would have stuffed
in the back pocket during
conflicts during the day--
he would come home and
take it out on her.
So the upper limit problem is a
tendency to sabotage ourselves
when things start going well.
And the other thing
"The Big Leap" is about
is about what happens
once you cure yourself
of your upper limit problem.
In the book, I
show that there are
only a few fears that are
underneath the upper limit
problem.
And once you learn
how to deal with them,
then you can move
through it into what
I call the genius zone.
And that's when you're doing
what you most love to do
and what you're having
a biggest impact doing.
I would say you're definitely
in your genius zone.
This is the first time I've
been on your television show,
but I've heard your radio
show many, many times.
And it's obvious when a
person's in their genius zone
because they look like
they're loving what they do.
>>NOORY: Sure.
I'd do it for free.
Shh.
Don't tell 'em.
>>HENDRICKS: Yeah,
that's exactly
the way I feel
about my job, too.
I would do it for free.
In fact, in "The
Big Leap," I say
that's one of the
characteristics of the genius
zone, is you're doing something
you like to do so much that you
can do it all day long, and you
don't get tired, and you can--
you'd do it for free if you had
some way of paying your rent.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
I've been doing this
coast-to-coast radio show now
for nearly 18 years,
and I have not
taken one straight
week of vacation.
>>HENDRICKS: Really?
Wow.
>>NOORY: Not one.
I will take an occasional
Friday night off just
to go out and do my
thing, but I have not
taken one week vacation
because I miss this show.
I miss doing it.
I enjoy coming to the
Denver/Boulder area
to do our "Beyond Belief"
tapings every month.
I mean, they're just
energizing for me.
I don't know.
Is that something
I taught myself?
What is that?
>>HENDRICKS: A lot
of times, it comes
from a succession
of small choices
where you choose more and more
to do more and more things you
love to do.
I worked in radio--
actually, I worked my
way through college
on the radio four hours a day
and going to college at night.
>>NOORY: Good for you.
>>HENDRICKS: Yeah, I was on
a Top-40 rock and roll radio
station back in the '60s
in Orlando, Florida.
>>NOORY: Did you talk
right up to that post?
>>HENDRICKS: Oh, yeah,
right up to that--
>>NOORY: Playing the big hits!
>>HENDRICKS: And we had jingles
that played in the background.
But what I was
going to say about
that is I was on the
air for four hours,
but it really seemed like
about 45 minutes every time.
>>NOORY: Exactly.
>>HENDRICKS: I would
go on at 10 o'clock,
and I'd get up at 2 o'clock
and say, where have I been?
Because the whole thing--
>>NOORY: It zooms by.
>>HENDRICKS: Yeah,
just zooms by.
And so god bless any one of
us that finds work like that
because--
there's an old
Yiddish saying that
says if you find
work you love, you
should ask for no other
blessing in life--
>>NOORY: Exactly.
>>HENDRICKS: --because
you're getting
to spend all day doing
what you most love to do.
>>NOORY: Can you see
emotion with children, too,
the same way as you
can with an adult?
>>HENDRICKS: More so.
>>NOORY: Really?
>>HENDRICKS: Yeah, more so,
because children hide it less.
By the time you get
out of high school--
well, listen to this.
You won't believe this.
My wife is a movement therapist.
She works a lot with
movement and helping people
learn to integrate their
bodies and minds better
through movement.
Kids, when they start--
before they go to school--
have 2,000 or 3,000 body
movements they can do.
By the time they graduate
from high school,
they're down to only 200
or 300 body movements
that they can do.
So we become kind of frozen
in the process of those 16
years sitting in-- or 12
years sitting in desks
and that kind of thing.
So she's a big advocate
for building more movement
into workday and the school day.
>>NOORY: My granddaughter has
a little 9-month-old baby,
which makes me a
great grandfather--
makes my mother a
great-great-grandmother.
It's almost unheard of.
And my granddaughter tells
me-- she says, Papa, Mila--
that's the little girl--
is going to be so determined
when she gets older.
And I'm asking her, and I said,
Ari, how do you know this?
And she said, look
at this video.
So she sent me a
video of the kid
looking for her little puppy.
And she's looking
underneath the couch,
and she's looking in the bed.
But when she
couldn't find it, you
could see this look on this
little 9-month-old's face,
like, oh.
Already at 9 months-- so
you're absolutely right.
You can tell.
>>HENDRICKS: Well
I got the pleasure
when I was in graduate
school of being able to study
newborn babies for a while.
The PhD program had
a good relationship
with the medical school.
So I was over there
observing newborns.
And you'd be surprised
at the range of emotions
that even little babies have.
>>NOORY: Yeah
>>HENDRICKS: They're most famous
for two or three emotions,
but they really have a
subtle play of emotions
from the very beginning.
>>NOORY: Can you predict
what their personality will
be like in the future by looking
at some of their gestures
and motions?
>>HENDRICKS: That's
a very long question,
but let me make it
a short question.
And that is that people
have two personalities.
Personality number
one is very easy
to spot early on because
personality number
one is their outgoing way
of relating to the world.
But we all have
personality two, which
is what we have to develop
to get along in a world that
may have some stresses
and difficulties
and may have a lot
of challenges to it.
So we learn a second
personality that's
wrapped around our
personality number one.
But in personality number
one, you see spontaneity.
You see wonder.
You see aliveness.
You see smiles.
You see authentic emotion.
If the person is
hungry, they let
you know about it
if they're a baby.
If they're wet, they
let you know about it.
But in adult life, we
learn to conceal ourselves
so much that that's where a
lot of our physical illnesses
come from.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>HENDRICKS: I've worked
with-- probably 400 by now--
people with back
pain or headaches.
And in 90% of the cases, it has
to do with an emotional issue
as much as anything physical.
In other words, there's
nothing actually deteriorating
about their spine.
>>NOORY: And the emotional issue
is physically getting to them.
>>HENDRICKS: Yes, because--
especially with the issue
of anger--
people, when they
hide their anger,
usually tense their muscles.
And if you do that in your back,
that causes pain very quickly.
And so I've found that--
well, my mentor, John
Sarno, M.D., who's now
passed on-- but he
was a great doctor
at Rusk Rehab in New York.
And I studied his work a lot.
And he said that
90% of back pain
has nothing to do
with your back,
really, that that's
just where you put it.
And because another person--
I've also worked with a lot of
people with chronic headaches.
And chronic headaches--
>>NOORY: Migraines?
>>HENDRICKS: --also
have a lot to do with--
migraines often have more to
do with the feeling of fear
and sadness down in the
middle of their bodies.
I've noticed that a lot of
times when people are getting
migraines, they're
sad about something
or scared about something.
>>NOORY: OK.
>>HENDRICKS: There's also
a physical component, too.
I want everybody to
make sure that they
are getting the medical
side of things handled, too.
But you need to often
look a little deeper
if you want to cure these
things on a permanent basis.
>>NOORY: Gay, on one
of the Gaia programs,
Marie Forleo shares
her beliefs about
these self-limiting abilities.
>>MARIE FORLEO: When it comes
to understanding whether or not
we have limiting
beliefs, one clue
is to see if there's a
recurring pattern in your life.
If there's something
that you say
that you want but it's
not a reality for you
and it's been true for
years and years and years,
or even months and
months and months,
and you've been working on
it, that's probably a clue
that there could be a
limiting belief under there
that you need to
investigate and then
consciously work on changing.
So I think when it comes
to limiting beliefs,
if there's any area in her
life that consistently creates
a lot of pain, a lot of stress,
a lot of struggle or anxiety,
a good place to peek
around is say, well,
what do I believe about this?
Do I believe that it's
possible to resolve?
Do I believe I'm worthy
of having this resolved?
I think investigating it on that
level from a place of curiosity
is step one because if you're
not aware of the belief,
it's hard to change it.
>>NOORY: Do you
agree with that, Gay?
>>HENDRICKS: I totally
agree with that.
In fact, "The Big Leap"--
you mentioned "The Big Leap."
A lot of "The Big Leap"
is about the three or four
fundamental limiting
beliefs that we have.
One of them is--
and you wouldn't believe
how prevalent this is.
Many people have a belief
inside that there's
something fundamentally
wrong or flawed about them.
And this is something that maybe
they've been told as a kid.
>>NOORY: Or beaten
down or something.
>>HENDRICKS: Beaten down, or
you're stupid, or you're ugly,
or--
so there's some kind of
a thing inside that says,
I'm fundamentally flawed.
That's one of the
biggest limiting beliefs.
The second one is,
I better not be
more successful because
if I'm more successful,
I'll outshine other people,
and that's a bad thing.
That'll make other
people feel bad.
And so you wouldn't be-- you'd
be surprised at the number of--
>>NOORY: The hold back?
>>HENDRICKS: They hold back.
They don't go to
their full potential
because they're afraid of
outshining someone else.
Another one is a big
fear a lot of people have
of that-- if I'm
more successful,
it'll be a bigger burden,
and I don't want more burden
in my life.
And in a way that's--
if you don't work success
right, it can be a burden.
I've worked with--
as you probably
have-- with people who have won
Grammys and Oscars and things
like that, and they're
just dying with it.
You know, they're so
overloaded with the commitments
and everything,
and they don't know
how to deal with the
conflicts in their life.
And so success comes with a
kind of a double edge to it
that unless you know how
to rise with your success
in a graceful way and
uncover your upper limits
and reveal those kind of
limiting beliefs that we all
carry around, you can really
kind of keep in the same rut
and routine for years
and years and years.
Whereas in "The Big Leap,"
what I want you to do
is free yourself from
those limiting beliefs
by dealing with those
fears that are right
underneath the surface, like
the fear that there's something
wrong with me or
the fear that I'm
going to outshine other
people or the fear
that I'm going to be burdened.
And I want people to deal with
those in a straightforward way
so they can move
into that genius zone
that I'm talking about.
>>NOORY: What is the
Hendricks Institute?
>>HENDRICKS: The
Hendricks Institute--
we've been around since 1989.
We're a center
that teaches people
how to do our form of
counseling and therapy--
our form of body-centered
transformation.
>>NOORY: OK.
>>HENDRICKS: So we train
professionals there.
We've trained about 2,000
medical doctors, lawyers,
counselors, therapists,
coaches over the years.
And also, we have seminars
for the general public,
too, on relationships.
My wife and I have
written a number
of books on
relationships, primarily
being one called "Conscious
Loving" that thanks to Oprah
got out into the world
about 30 years ago.
And so we've teaching--
>>NOORY: Good old Oprah.
>>HENDRICKS: Yes,
god bless Oprah.
Yes, I wouldn't be
here without her.
She's kind of a
neighbor of ours now.
We live a stone's
throw over from her.
Yeah, wonderful lady.
But in our relationship work,
we have seminars that we teach.
And also, we have a non-profit
foundation that does things
like fund a lot of
documentary films--
>>NOORY: Oh, good for you.
>>HENDRICKS: --and fun research
projects and things like that.
>>NOORY: How many
professionals don't get it?
Don't understand?
>>HENDRICKS: Well, this gets
into a sore subject to mine
because--
>>NOORY: I know.
I must have touched--
I'm seeing it on your face.
>>HENDRICKS: Did you see
my body language there?
>>NOORY: I saw your body--
I saw your eyes.
>>HENDRICKS: Well, I'll
tell you a personal story.
I went to a meeting one time--
a very traditional psychiatrist,
psychologist, and social worker.
And I came out later,
and I said to my wife,
I'm getting depressed because
I was so concerned about where
our field is because our field
has gotten itself so heady
that we've lost the heart
component a lot of times.
And I always tell people
the longest journey
any human being ever makes is
a 12-inch journey from here
down to here to get that
body and mind, that heart
and mind working together.
But unfortunately, a
lot of mental health
has gotten too mental and not
enough about the whole person.
See, mental health
has a lot to do
with how you relate
to other people
and how you relate
to your community.
It's not just an
internal kind of thing.
So I think--
I have hope because I think
about maybe 10% or 15%
of my field now really gets
what we're talking about here
and really sees the
person as a body
and a spirit and an emotion and
a mind and a heart all at once.
But unless we do
that, we're kind of
like driving a car with only
one or two cylinders firing.
>>NOORY: How in the world did
you get involved in this field?
>>HENDRICKS: Well, I'm a
classic wounded healer.
I used to weigh 320 pounds.
>>NOORY: No.
How tall are you?
>>HENDRICKS: I did.
I was six feet tall,
>>NOORY: All right.
>>HENDRICKS: And I
was still 6 feet tall
when I weighed 300 pounds, too.
>>NOORY: Yeah, exactly.
>>HENDRICKS: Unfortunately.
But I grew up as a fat kid.
I was taken around to lots of
different medical personnel
because I was the only
fat person in a family
of all skinny people.
So there was obviously
something wrong with me.
I was eating the
same stuff they were.
They later found there was all
sorts of glandular problems.
But I'll tell you, once having
weighed 320 pounds and now,
for the last 50
years, weighing--
>>NOORY: You're trim and fit.
>>HENDRICKS: --180 pounds.
Yeah.
So I got into this
field to cure myself,
basically-- to find out
why I weighed 320 pounds.
Because the medics
weren't doing it for me.
I was taking all
the pills, and I
was taking amphetamines
and all that stuff.
But none of them
really helped me
lose the weight or permanently.
>>NOORY: Nothing worked.
>>HENDRICKS: And so I
did it the natural way.
I think a lot of your
viewers will appreciate it
because I found out on one magic
day when I was 24 years old--
I realized I was not just
a body and not just a mind.
>>NOORY: At that age?
>>HENDRICKS: I
was a spirit, too.
I discovered that part
of me that's pure spirit.
And it wasn't exactly
a religious conversion.
There wasn't a religion
associated with it.
It actually it happened
when I fell on my back
on the ice one day
in New England.
>>NOORY: Ouch.
>>HENDRICKS: And I didn't
knock myself out, but I--
I say now I had an
out-of-Hendricks experience.
>>NOORY: You're sprawled on
your back just thinking, what
have I done?
>>HENDRICKS: What have I done?
Because to my right
was a jagged rock.
And I realized, if I'd
fallen 6 inches to the right,
I might have a hole
in my skull right now.
>>NOORY: Yeah, you may be dead.
>>HENDRICKS: So that was a
moment of waking up for me.
And in that moment, I could
feel that spirit part of me
for the first time.
And so for the next year, I ate
only foods that fed my spirit.
I ate apples instead
of candy bars,
and I ate blueberries instead
of ice cream, and I ate--
I just ate food that
I'd never eaten before.
I discovered the magic
of fruits and vegetables.
And within a year, I'd
lost more than 100 pounds.
And not only that--
my sight changed.
I no longer had to wear
glasses after that year.
>>NOORY: Really?
That's dramatic.
>>HENDRICKS: Yeah.
I can pass my
driver's test now--
I'm 75 years old.
I'm still passing my
driver's test without--
>>NOORY: Good for you.
>>HENDRICKS:
--wearing any glasses.
The other thing
that happened was I
developed what I now call
light psychic capabilities.
I began to be able to
see things in my clients.
And I don't make a
profession out of this,
or anything like this.
But I'm open to it when
I work with my clients.
I was working with a person
one day, and all of a sudden
the image came to
me of that person
finding a dead person
when they were little
and it having some
kind of impact.
And I just blurted it out.
I said, did you
have some experience
with seeing a dead person
when you were a kid?
>>NOORY: Just popped--
>>HENDRICKS: Popped.
It just popped out.
And her jaw dropped.
And she said, oh, my god.
That was one of the
worst times of my life.
>>NOORY: Wow.
>>HENDRICKS: She
was coming home when
she was, like, 8
or 10 years old,
and she saw a person in a ditch.
And she thought it
was a dead person,
and she ran home and told
her parents about it.
And they came--
and it turned out
to be a drunk person
who'd passed out.
>>NOORY: Who'd passed out.
>>HENDRICKS: But the
trauma was the way
it was handled in her family.
It became a big joke.
Oh, look, she thought
the person was dead.
It was actually drunk.
So she was kind of
humiliated for this thing,
and it became a family joke.
And so it came in
handy in therapy
to have things like
that just come to me.
And I've used it now--
I've worked with something
like 1,000 business executives
over the past 30 years.
And I even use it with, like,
the CEO of a big company
when I'm in there.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>HENDRICKS: I think that any
therapist worth their salt
has got to be a
little bit psychic.
>>NOORY: That's amazing.
>>HENDRICKS: Otherwise,
you should go
into some other line of work.
And certainly you should be
open to receiving information
from other places.
>>NOORY: Gay, on the
Gaia "Inspirations" show
with Regina Meredith,
David Francis talked
about how people can lose
their authentic selves
in relationships.
>>REGINA MEREDITH: You have this
relationship in the beginning
that has this exuberance to it.
And before you know it,
fear starts seeping in.
Oh, this is so wonderful.
What if I lose
this relationship?
And that seems to
distort and throw--
I know women in particular--
them into patterns
of becoming pleasers.
The man was originally attracted
to their authentic signal,
right?
And vise versa.
>>DAVID FRANCIS: Yes, yes, yes.
Yes.
A great example is a radio
set-- just a simple, practical
example.
The old fashioned
kind with a dial?
And when you get
the dial on station,
you get this beautiful music.
But if the dial
turns off station,
you start to get static.
So when a person starts
to produce static
because they're no longer true
to their own authentic self,
then it's very hard
to pick up their song.
And so what gets
attracted is no longer
what's on their frequency.
So we actually
are in a situation
where when we can be
true to ourselves,
we sing our own song.
When that song goes
out into the ether,
someone else can actually
register and pick up
what that song is,
and they come to it.
But if we're not actually
tuned in to ourselves--
it's like if we decide we're
going to take on the goth look.
But that's nothing to
do with our reality.
But it's come upon
us from the outside.
We just become another
goth look person
rather than being
authentic to who we are.
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
And our own signal
starts becoming obscured.
>>DAVID FRANCIS: Exactly.
And it could go from
goth look to Vogue model
to whatever the model would be.
Or in the man's world,
it's got to be--
whether it's following NASCAR
or wearing certain sporty things
in gentlemen's magazines or
whatever the thing-- there's
a massive influence
comes towards the person.
And when we adopt
those signals, they
can obscure our
actual core signal.
So when that happens, first of
all, we can't find our partner.
And then, if we are
fortunate enough
to engage, if we become
pleasers, so we think,
oh, what does he
really want me to be?
What does she really
want me to be?
>>REGINA MEREDITH: And women--
I know women who
are amazing women,
powerful women in their own
right-- talented, beautiful.
They go into a relationship,
and the first thing that happens
is you start losing
yourself in fear you're
going to lose the guy and
starting to please and become
what you think that person
wants, as I mentioned earlier.
This is epidemic.
>>NOORY: There's a science
behind this, Gay, isn't there?
>>HENDRICKS: There is.
In fact, I mentioned that
my wife and I have written
a number of relationship books.
And one of the things
that we found--
I mentioned the
upper limit problem.
Well, if you want to see
the upper limit problem,
look into relationships.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>HENDRICKS: Because
couples will get along well
for a couple of days.
And then all of a sudden,
some old fear will come up.
But the problem is,
a lot of us learn
to conceal rather than
reveal in relationships.
And so my wife and
I have worked with,
I believe, about
4,500 couples now.
And I would say that the number
one problem that people come in
with is an inability
to communicate
really simple things.
Just make little 10
second communications,
like, I appreciate you, or I
love you, or I'm mad at you,
or I feel scared
right now, or I'm sad.
Just little moments of
authentic communication
make such huge, huge
difference in people's lives.
>>NOORY: Does compliments
or building up people--
does that help in a
relationship as opposed
to someone who's abusive
and puts people down?
>>HENDRICKS: Definitely.
Well, appreciation is one of the
miracle tools of relationship.
I think that John Gottman,
the relationship researcher up
at the University of Washington
who works on relationships--
and he found that relationships
that have a 5 to 1
appreciation to criticism
ratio are ones that work best.
So make sure you-- if
you criticize somebody,
make sure you give them at
least five compliments later
to make up for it.
>>NOORY: To ease them--
make them feel better.
>>HENDRICKS: To ease them.
The other thing is that
I know my wife loves
verbal compliments.
She loves it when
I say, I really
appreciate the way
you look today,
or, I really appreciate what
you did for me and the girls
yesterday.
But she also really
thrives on physical--
like, physical.
So we've got to make sure that
we get the verbal balance.
>>NOORY: Humans need
both, don't they?
>>HENDRICKS: Humans need both.
We're-- the skin is
our largest organ.
We need to be held close.
And so my wife and I have a
tradition of 20-second hugs
because we found that
there's a research
study that a
20-second hug releases
oxytocin, which is a bonding
chemical in your body.
And so we have
pictures of ourselves
from all over the world doing
our 20-second hug-- like,
at the top of Machu Picchu.
>>NOORY: Not 19, but 20, right?
>>HENDRICKS: 20.
That's right.
>>NOORY: You have a book
out called "Conscious Luck."
tell us about that.
>>HENDRICKS: Well, "Conscious
Luck" is my recent passion.
I started working with
people a while back
on the issue of helping
make them more lucky.
And I got fascinated
that because I
had an experience once of
actually deciding consciously
that I was going to
be luckier, and then
having something lucky happened
to me right afterwards.
And it made a true--
>>NOORY: Yeah, I believe this.
This is true.
>>HENDRICKS: --true believer.
Yeah.
And then I had this--
a friend of mine and
I were at a movie.
And they had a drawing, and
they were 250 people there.
And we all put our tickets
in a goldfish bowl,
and they were going to
draw the tickets out.
And my friend said, watch this.
I'm going to win.
And I said, how
do you know that?
And he said, I always win
lotteries and drawings
and things like that.
Sure enough, they pulled
his name out number one.
>>NOORY: Of all these tickets?
>>HENDRICKS: Of all 250
tickets, he was the top prize,
and he won a wristwatch.
And afterwards, we
were walking home,
and I said, how did you do that?
And he said, well, he had
just made up his mind one
day that he was going
to be what he said--
one of the lucky ones.
And I asked him what that meant.
And he said that in his family,
the people that were lucky seem
to have good things
happen to them,
and the people that considered
themselves unlucky didn't.
So he said, I'm going to
be one of the lucky ones.
And so from that day on, he'd
had all these good things
happen.
So I just decided to kind
of take it on myself.
And so I got interested in this
thing of consciously changing
our luck.
And so I started working
with all sorts of people--
everybody from Las
Vegas gamblers--
>>NOORY: Oh sure, absolutely.
>>HENDRICKS: --to
CEOs because you'd
be surprised at how much luck
plays in the field of even
a corporate CEO.
>>NOORY: Are you familiar with
Joseph Gallenberger's work?
>>HENDRICKS: Sure.
>>NOORY: Liquid luck?
>>HENDRICKS: Yeah.
>>NOORY: Same thing.
>>HENDRICKS: Same thing.
And see, I believe that
unless we are consciously
working every day on
making ourselves luckier,
we're not taking
advantage of the odds.
And in "Conscious Luck,"
my researcher Carol and
I found eight different paths
that people use to get lucky.
>>NOORY: I love this.
>>HENDRICKS: And
so we just describe
all of those very
carefully in the book.
And some are some things that
you can do in 10 seconds.
>>NOORY: They're easy, yeah.
>>HENDRICKS: They're easy.
Like, the simplest one in
the book in the first chapter
is simply to make a
commitment to being luckier.
And it doesn't cost you
a nickel to do that.
You can just say, OK, I
commit to being luckier today
than I was yesterday.
And I commit to being luckier
tomorrow than I was yesterday.
And so every day, you
get a little bit luckier.
It's kind of like going to
the gym and doing a few--
>>NOORY: Is it
positive thinking?
>>HENDRICKS: It's a form
of positive thinking.
Do you remember William
James, the great--
he was called the father
of American psychology?
He lived in the 19th century.
And the 19th century had
everything from locomotives
to telegraphs invented.
So it was a big century.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>HENDRICKS: He said the
greatest discovery of his
time--
the 19th century--
was that human beings
could change the
direction of their lives
by changing their thoughts.
>>NOORY: I agree with that.
>>HENDRICKS: I totally
agree with that.
>>NOORY: 100%.
>>HENDRICKS: And I used to
be my own worst customer,
in a sense, because
I grew up in a family
where people just did not
think positively at all.
In fact, it was kind of a
family of cynics, you know.
And to this day--
>>NOORY: Malcontents.
>>HENDRICKS: Yeah.
My brother-- if I say something
positive to my brother,
he will say the exact
same thing that he
said when he was
15 years old, even
though he's 83 years old now.
He will say something like--
I'll say, well, we're going
to the beach tomorrow.
And he'll say, well, god,
I hope it doesn't rain.
>>NOORY: Right, exactly-- rather
than being positive about it.
>>HENDRICKS: Yeah.
So one of the things I had
to learn as a grown-up was
how to think more
positively of things
because I found
myself-- in my 20s,
I would always look
at the negative side.
And when my daughter was
born, I kind of made a vow
that I wasn't going to
teach her negative thinking.
I was going to teach her how
to think more positively.
And I think-- even
though she's now 50,
I think it had a
positive effect on her.
>>NOORY: There's a fellow
by the name of Dan Heer who
talks with our Lisa Garr
on the Gaia "Inspirations"
show about picking up
other people's beliefs,
just like you were talking
about your brother.
>>DAN HEER: The idea that 98%
of your thoughts, your feelings,
and your emotions don't
actually belong to you--
they actually belong to
the people around you.
And you're like a big,
psychic radio receiver,
and you've been picking it
up your whole life, which
means that 98% of
the unhappiness,
98% of the sadness,
98% of the anger,
98% of the money struggle,
98% of the feeling
that you can't do it and
can't create the life you
want isn't actually yours.
You're so psychically
aware of those energies
that you pick them up like a
big psychic radio receiver,
and you've been thinking
they're yours your whole life.
>>LISA GARR: Right, of course.
Yes.
>>DAN HEER: And if
that weren't there?
>>LISA GARR: So
a good question--
who would I be?
Right?
>>DAN HEER: Yeah, exactly.
>>LISA GARR: Who would I be?
So you start off
by asking yourself,
who does this belong to?
>>DAN HEER: Yeah.
And in actuality, if
you'll do that for three
days to every thought, feeling,
emotion, judgment, heaviness,
or point of view you have--
for three days,
literally, for everything
that takes you
out of being space
into-- eh, every single thing.
If you ask, who
does this belong to?
If it lightens up at
all, it's not yours.
Return it to sender.
And the thing is, you don't even
have to know who the sender is.
>>LISA GARR: Right.
>>DAN HEER: You
just want to give it
back to the person who
originally created it
so they can work
on it so you're not
working on all kinds of
other people's stuff.
>>NOORY: Since you've been
doing this all these years,
what has been the
most dramatic story
you've come across of change?
>>HENDRICKS: I've had
three similar instances,
but the first one
that happened really
shocked me in a
very positive way.
I worked with a woman
who was at the time
maybe 28, 30 years old.
And her hearing had disappeared.
And she had about
50% hearing loss
for no reason that
could be detected.
And so--
>>NOORY: Nothing medical?
>>HENDRICKS: Nothing medical.
She'd had all the usual tests,
and nobody could figure it out.
And she'd even done
some psychiatry
where they talked
about childhood
issues and everything.
But in my work with her were
doing body-centered therapy,
which often kind of
cuts through very fast
and gets to things very quickly.
And I noticed, as she was
talking about her hearing
problem, that she really kept
gesturing toward her pelvis.
And so I took a bold leap.
I said, were you ever
sexually violated or messed
with as a young person?
Boom.
>>NOORY: Uh-oh.
>>HENDRICKS: Boom.
Out came the story that
she had never told anyone
about the sexual violation
that had happened when
she was 12 or 13 years old.
Now, why did it cause a hearing
problem when she was 28 or 29?
>>NOORY: There's some
kind of block somewhere.
>>HENDRICKS: What
happened was, she'd
had an interaction with a man
who was very interested in her.
And as he was kind of
making his play for her,
it brought up this whole issue.
But she didn't even
remember it at the time.
She just knew that
something was wrong,
and her hearing disappeared.
>>NOORY: Something's wrong.
Yeah.
>>HENDRICKS: And so as we
worked together, her hearing
came back.
>>NOORY: Wow.
It's almost a miracle.
>>HENDRICKS: You only get to
see something like that in life
if you're very blessed,
I think, one time.
I've gotten to have that happen
three times with the actual--
once it happened with her--
>>NOORY: Yeah, that's dramatic.
>>HENDRICKS: --next
time I worked
with a person who
had hearing problems,
I looked into that
issue with them.
And the same-- similar issue.
Not exactly the same.
But to me, our bodies have
been communicating with us
for millions and
millions of years.
But our mouths haven't been
communicating very long at all.
Language is a recent development
compared to our emotions.
So we've got to make sure we
honor the whole person when
we look at ourselves.
And especially if we're a
therapist or a counselor
or a coach, we've
got to remember
that this is a whole
person we're dealing with,
not just a mind.
>>NOORY: As we wrap
things up, Gay,
tell us about a breathing
experiment exercise
that we can all do.
>>HENDRICKS: There is
one I teach everybody.
And that is to take
three easy breaths
and change your body position.
And the reason I
tell everybody to do
that is because if
you do that, you only
have to take three easy, big
breaths before your stress
chemistry begins to shift
in your bloodstream.
So watch me.
I'm going to take
three big breaths,
and I'm going to use
my whole body to do it.
Watch this.
Notice how I'm flexing my spine.
>>NOORY: That was one.
Two.
Three.
>>HENDRICKS: Give
yourself a good stretch.
So take three easy breaths.
Now here's the miracle part.
The breath has got to
be 8 to 10 seconds long.
So make sure you go,
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
>>NOORY: In and
out, eight seconds.
>>HENDRICKS: In
out for 8 seconds--
8 to 10 seconds--
three of those.
And then stretch your body.
Move your body.
Move your joints
around a little bit.
And that has the
effect of-- beginning
to shift things actually
chase the stress chemistry out
of your body.
>>NOORY: Really?
Will that make you luckier?
>>HENDRICKS: If you
read "Conscious Luck."
>>NOORY: I love it.
>>HENDRICKS: I love it.
>>NOORY: Gay, Thanks for
being on "Beyond Belief."
>>HENDRICKS: Thank you.
You're doing a great
job in the world.
I appreciate your work
on the radio and on TV.
>>NOORY: Three deep
breaths, change your body,
and your world will change.
I'm George Noory.
Thanks for watching
"Beyond Belief."
[MUSIC PLAYING]